In the cemetery, on a fresh pile of earth, there is a new cross. It is made of oak, it is heavy and smootha pleasure to look at. 
It's April, but the days are gray. In the spacious countrytown cemetery the monuments are visible in the distance through the branches of barren trees, and the cold wind rings through the leaves ofthe porcelain wreath at the foot of the cross. 
The cross holds a fairly large bronze medallion; on it is the photograph of an elegant and lovely highschool girl with joyful, uncommonly lively eyes. 
This was Olia Meshcherskaia. 
As a girl she did not stand out in the noisy crowd of schoolgirls, all dressed in brown, who filled the halls and classrooms of the school with laughter and noise. Nothing much could be said about her except that she was a pretty, welltodo, and happy girl, that she was gifted but mischievous, and totally unconcerned with the admonitions given her by her teachers. Suddenly she began to blossom, by the day, by the hour. At fourteen she had a thin waist, handsome legs, well defined breasts, and all those contours of the body, the grace of which human words have been unable to express. At fifteen everyone said she was a beauty. Her schoolmates took pains to comb their hair frequently and meticulously, to move gracefullybut not Olia; she was worried about nothing! Not of ink stains on her fingers, nor of a flushed face, disheveled hair, or ofscraping her knee in a fall. Everything that distinguished her from all the others during her last two years at schoolgrace, elegance, a lively and intelligent look in her eyescame to her without any effort on her part, unnoticed, as a blessing. No one danced as well as Olia Meshcherskaia. No one skated as gracefully as she. No one was courted as much at dances as she. And for some reason, the younger grades liked her better than anyone else. Imperceptibly she became  young lady, and her fame at school spread almost imperceptibly, and rumors began.to circulate that she was frivolous, that she could not live without admirers, that the schoolboy Shenshin had lost his head over her, that she was also in love with him but was so capricious in her behavior toward him that he attempted suicide. . . . 
During the last winter of her life Olia Meshcherskaia's schoolmates said that she threw herself into the pursuit of pleasure. The winter was sunny, cold, with plenty of snow. The sun set early behind the tall fir trees of the snowcovered school park. Every evening there was a serene sunset that promised another sunny, cold day for tomorrow. To say nothing of strolling down Cathedral Street, skating in the city park on a rosetinged evening, music, the throng gliding over the ice; in this Olia Meshcherskaia seemed to be the most elegant, carefree, and happy person. Once, during a recess at school, when she was dashing about in the inain hall with the firstgraders chasing her with happy screams, she was unexpectedly summoned to the principal's office. Olia stopped dead, took one deep breath, smoothed her hair with a habitual gesture, pulled up her pinafore, and ran upstairs, her eyes radiant. The principal, a small, younglooking, but grayhaired lady, was sitting under the Tsar's portrait, quietly knitting behind her desk. 
"Good morning, Mile Meshcherskaia," she said in French without lifting her eyes. "Unfortunately, this is not the first time that I have had t? summon you here to talk to you about your behavior." 
"I am listening, Madame," replied Olia as she approached the desk, looking at the principal with bright and lively eyes, but with a demure expression on her face, and sitting down with her customary ease and grace. 
"You'll listen quite carelessly, as bitter experience has taught me," the principal said, pulled the thread, making a swirl on the polished floor, which Olia watched with curiosity; she raised her eyes and said, "I shan't repeat myself. I'll be brief." 
Olia liked the unusually neat and spacious study, which was particularly warm and cozy during cold winter days, with its shiny tile stove 
and lilies of the valley on the desk. She looked at the young Tsar painted lifesize, standing in some glittering hall, and at the principal's white hair, carefully parted in the middle and carefully curled, and sat in silence and expectation. 
"You're no longer a little girl," said the principal, significantly, and she was secretly beginning to grow irritated. 
"Yes, Madame," Olia answered simply, almost gaily. 
"But not yet a woman," added the principal even more significantly, and her pale face flushed slightly. "First of all, what kind of a hairdo is this? This is a woman's hairdo!" 
"It isn't my fault, Madame, that I have nice hair," replied Olia, as she smoothed her beautifully groomed hair with both hands. 
"So now it's not your fault!" said the principal. "The hairdo is not your fault! The expensive combs are not your fault! The twenty ruble slippers you made your parents buy you are not your fault! But let me repeat, you seem to forget that you're only a schoolgirl. ..." 
At this point Olia, without losing her calm and simplicity, suddenly but politely interrupted her. 
"Excuse me, Madame, but you're making a mistake. I am a woman. And, do you know who is to blame? A friend and neighbor of Papa's, your brother Aleksei Mikhailovich Maliutin. It happened last summer, in the country...." 
A month after this conversation took place, a Cossack officer, ugly and coarse in appearance and having nothing in common with the class of people to which Olia Meshcherskaia belonged, shot her on the platform of the railway station, in the lnidst of a large crowd which had just arrived on a train. Olia's incredible confession, which had stunned the school principal, was fully corroborated. The officer told the investigator that Olia had seduced him, had had an affair with him, had promised to become his wife. But on the day of the murder, at the railway station, as she was seeing him off to Novocherkassk, she suddenly announced that she had never loved him, that all the talk about marriage was nothing but a joke, that she had been making fun of him, and then she had let him read the page in her diary where she mentioned Maliutin: 
"I ran through these lines, stepped up onto the platform where she was strolling, waiting for me to finish reading, and shot her," testified the officer. "The diary is in the pocket of my overcoat. Take a look and see what it says on the page marked the tenth ofJuly of last year."
The investigator read what follows. "It's two o'clock in the morning. I had fallen asleep, but woke up before long .... Today I had become a woman! Papa, Mama, and Tolia had all gone to town, and I had remained alone. I was so happy to. be alone. There are no words to express how happy! In the morning I walked in the garden, in the fields, in the woods, all by myself. I felt as though I were alone in the entire world, and I had never felt so good. I had lunch all by myself, then I played the piano for an hour, and the music made me feel as if I would live forever, happy as no one else! I had a nap in Papa's study; Katia woke me at four to tell me that Aleksei Mikhailovich had arrived. I was very glad and quite pleased to receive and entertain him. He came with his pair of Vyatka colts, very_ beautiful ones. They stood all the time near the porch, but he stayed on because it was raining and he didn't want to get wet. He was sorry that he had missed Papa, carried on a lively conversation with me, was vry galant, and said jokingly that he had fallen in love with me long ago. When we walked through the garden before tea, the weather had become fine again and the wet foliage was glittering in the sun. It had become chilly, and as he took my arm he said that he was Faust with Marguerite. He is fiftysix, but still quite handsome, and always well dressed,only I didn't like the cape he arrived in,it smells of English cologne, and his eyes are quite young and black and his beard is carefully divided into two flowing parts and is silver. We had tea on the glassenclosed veranda, I felt faint for a moment and lay down on a low couch, while he smoked; then he sat by me, paid me compliments, took my hand and kissed it. I covered my face with a silk handkerchief, but he kissed me several times on the lips through the handkerchief. . . . I don't understand how it could have happened. I must have lost my mind. I never thought I could be like that! Now there's only one way out for me . . . I feel such disgust for him, that I cannot live with it!" During those April days the town has become clean and dry. The stones are white. and it is pleasant to walk on them. Every Sunday, after Mass, a little woman dressed in black for mourning, with black kid gloves and a black umbrella, walks along Cathedral Street, which leads outside the town. She walks by the fire station and crosses a dirty ' square, where there are many sooty smithies. Further, between the monastery and the jail, the spring fields are gray and the cloudy sky is white. She treads through the puddles along the monastery wall; turns left into a large garden enclosed by a white fence with a gate on which is painted, "The Assumption of the Mother of God." The little woman crosses herself several times and walks along the main path like some one who knows her way. She reaches a bench in front of the oaken cross, sits down in the wind and spring chill for an hour or two, until her feet in their light shoes and her hands in their kid gloves are frozen. She listens to the birds singing in the cold and to the wind softly whistling in the porcelain wreath, and she thinks that she would give half her life not to see that dead wreath. The idea that Olia Meshcherskaia lies there, buried in the frozen earth, throws her into a state of mind that borders on stupor. How can one associate that sixteenyearold schoolgirl, so full oflife, grace, and joy only two or three months ago, with this earthen mound and oaken cross? Is it possible that they hide the girl, whose eyes sparkle, as if they were alive, in the bronze medallion? How can one combine this pure and innocent look with all the horror associated with Olia Meshcherskaia's name? But deep down in her heart the little woman is happy, as are all those in love, or devoted to some ardent dream. 
The little woman is Olia Meshcherskaia's schoolteacher, a maiden lady of thirty, who for a long time has been living under delusions which to her are a substitute for life's reality. The first was her brother, a poor, commonplace noncommissioned officer. She had tied her soul to his, to his future, which she believed would be brilliant. She had lived in the strange expectation that her fate would miraculously change on account of him. Then, when he was killed in the battle of Mukden, she convinced herself (to her great relief apparently) that she was different from the others, that for her, beauty and femininity would be replaced by superior qualities of the mind. She believed she was a martyr to the world of ideas. Olia Meshcherskaia's death provided her with a new delusion; and now Olia is the object of her ceaseless thoughts, admiration, and delight. Every holiday she visits the grave. The habit ofwearing black goes back to her brother's death. She stares at the oaken cross for hours, thinks ofOlia's pale face in the coffin among the flowers, and remembers what she once overheard during school recess. Walking in the schoolyard with her closest friend, the stout, tall Subbotina, Olia had breathlessly told her: "In one of my father's books,he has so many funny antique booksI read a description of what a woman's beauty should be. . . . You understand, there is so much in it that you can't remember everything: well, black eyes, of course, gleaming like boiling pitch, that's the way it was written: like boiling pitch! Eyelashes as black as night, a gentle glow of color, a slender figure, hands longer than usualyou know, longer than usual!a small foot, a moderately large bosom, a nice round calf, knees the pink color of a seashell, fairly high shoulders. I've learned all this by heart. It's all so true! And most important, you know what? A gentle breath! I have it, don't I? Listen, how I sigh. It's there, isn't it?" 
And now this gentle breath is dissipated again in the world, in this cloudcovered sky, in this cold spring wind.... 
