Picture a middle-class American family, four generations, living in the suburbs. The “founder” is an upstart with a murky past, a hard-working construction guy in a bleak marriage. Next in line are his son and the son’s wife — he’s a chip off the old patriarch, inherits the construction business, soldiers on. She’s the maddening, meddling family fixer-upper, determined that her four children will, against all odds, tolerate if not love one another. And then there are the children, at midlife and with children of their own: a couple of daughters who annoy each other, an “acquired” son (the product of a “crazy arrangement”) and of course the obligatory black sheep, Denny, the prodigal son who surfaces intermittently to provide the drama, which, after all, is his job — in the family as in the plot of Anne Tyler’s graceful and capacious new novel, “A Spool of Blue Thread.”
So what else is new? Give or take a few details, this appended/blended/fouled-up family could be any of ours. That makes it cliché territory, risky for an ambitious novelist. It’s also quintessential Anne Tyler, as well as quintessential American comedy. Tyler has a knack for turning sitcom situations into something far deeper and more moving. Her great gift is playing against the American dream, the dark side of which is the falsehood at its heart: that given hard work and good intentions, any family can attain the Norman Rockwell ideal of happiness — ordinary, homegrown happiness.
Happiness indeed eludes the Whitshank family of Baltimore. That’s where Junior, the founder, begins by constructing a house, a place that becomes the love of his life, as well as that of his son, Red, and eventually some of the other children and grandchildren. The house is initially commissioned by a rich businessman, but Junior, who is hired to build it, sets his heart on the place the minute he sees the blueprints, crafts it to his own high standards and eventually acquires it by some mild chicanery. The house is no Sutpen’s Hundred, no Manderley, “more, let’s say, a family house. A house you might see pictured on a thousand-piece jigsaw puzzle, plain-faced and comfortable” with a “wonderful full-length porch.” It projects ordinariness, togetherness, timelessness. And it has the power to draw the family back to it over the generations.
Togetherness and ordinariness are mixed blessings. Junior’s family is anything but ordinary. Early on, he’s entrapped by a 13-year-old seductress (half his age) who bides her time and eventually gets her man. (The Whitshanks are champion time-biders.) Junior and his wife in turn give birth to Redcliffe (boy) and Merrick (girl), their highfalutin names bestowed by Junior, who, much as he may resent his snooty neighbors, apes their ways. (Tyler has fun with Merrick, the kind of girl who steals her best friend’s beau and sashays off into the upper echelons of Baltimore society, where people have names like Pookie and Pixie.)
While Merrick escapes, her brother, Red, takes on the family construction business and a wife named Abby. Alas, poor Abby! She’s a staple of Tyler fiction: the self-­denigrating/self-aggrandizing embarrassment of a mother you hope will never show up at your school function. It’s Abby, Red and their children we get to know best as the family slowly disintegrates. They’re first met as the novel opens and Denny calls home to tell Red and Abby he’s gay. (He’s not.) “What the hell,” Red snorts, whereupon Denny hangs up and Abby wigs out. The ensuing scene hilariously captures small fractures, now grown into ruts, in an old, well-worn marriage.
Denny is a walking catastrophe: college dropout, erstwhile stoner, irregularly employed, an unmarried and truant father, sometimes homeless, usually out of reach. No one in the family, not his parents or his two sisters and younger brother, can cope with his existence, let alone his occasional homecomings. His older sister, Amanda, puts it best when, in a moment of exasperation, she confronts him with a litany of domestic crimes and misdemeanors. It’s an inventory every family with a black sheep knows all too well — neglected birthdays, absence at anniversaries and weddings and family reunions, general insufferable narcissism — but the bill of wrongs finally names the real source of his siblings’ pain: “But most of all, Denny, most of all: I will never forgive you for consuming every last little drop of our parents’ attention and leaving nothing for the rest of us.” Denny is one of Tyler’s most endearing miscreants. He’s surely unforgivable, but she has a soft spot for him and so she wins us over.
When Red starts going deaf and then has a heart attack, when Abby’s brain starts to “jump the track,” the family converges to take over their care. Predictably, the “good” son, dutiful Stem, not even a Whitshank by birth (his birth mother’s identity a closely held secret), and Stem’s judicious wife, Nora, move into the old house to manage the aging parents. But — atypically — bad boy Denny suddenly arrives to shoulder a share of the burden. Here Tyler concocts a noxious brew of ancient jealousies, resentments and guilt as the siblings vie for control. After a family slugfest that ends in some minor bloodshed and a kitchen full of “fluttering women and shocked, wide-eyed children,” the truth surfaces. “I sure don’t want to be in charge,” Denny cries. “It’s that Dad isn’t satisfied with the rest of us. . . . All my life Dad has made me feel I didn’t quite measure up. . . . Like I’m lame; I’m lacking.”
Was that how the prodigal son felt? Is that why he left home in the first place? And what about his stay-at-home brother? Seeing his father kill the fatted calf to welcome him, the angry, dutiful brother had every right to complain. You wonder where the mother was in Jesus’ parable. If she was anything like Abby, she, like God, was squarely on the side of the lost sheep.
For Tyler, the quality of mercy is anything but strained. By her own admission, she’s a chronicler of sad failures and unhappy marriages. In novel after novel she predisposes her characters to crave the unattainable — parental love (in both directions), a sense of belonging (among your own and in the world), forgiveness, amnesty from familial wrongdoing, the comfort of home. And yet she’s a comic novelist, and a wise one. The calamities she depicts are minor, after all, and her characters aren’t the twisted, fearsome ones of much American fiction.
Her take on her crazies and misfits seems to line up with that of Abby, who, recalling the demise of the Wicked Witch of the West in “The Wizard of Oz,” concludes, “I really believe that most people who seem scary are just sad.” Interestingly, what Abby recalls most strongly among the witch’s last words isn’t just her cry, “I’m melting, I’m melting,” as we all remember it. Rather, it’s the witch’s lament: “Who would have thought a good little girl like you could destroy my beautiful wickedness?” In “A Spool of Blue Thread,” as in her work in general, goodness trumps wickedness, there’s no place like home and, yes, we can all go there again, even if it isn’t that perfect place we long for.
