BARKSKINSBy Annie Proulx717 pp. Scribner. $32.
Whatever else she's writing about, the novelist and story writer Annie Proulx is always writing at least partly about our tempestuous relationship with nature. It's there in the forbidding seas of her Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, "The Shipping News." It's there in the hardscrabble ranches and "bad dirt" of her Wyoming stories (including "Brokeback Mountain," where desire is the natural force that demands a reckoning). And it's there in her fifth and latest novel, "Barkskins" — a tale of long-term, shortsighted greed whose subject could not be more important: the destruction of the world's forests.
Resource extraction on an industrial scale mostly exemplifies the infamous tragedy of the commons: namely, that degradation to the environment is a fractional cost divided among everybody around, while the benefit to each exploiter is a whole integer that need not be shared. For example, if I clear-cut a forest, I am damaging it for all of us, myself included — but since my profit accrues to me alone, I can happily ruin the place and move on. Thus "Barkskins."
Proulx employs a sophisticated narrative strategy of oscillating focus. Sometimes the techno-commercial practices of a given era are foregrounded, as in this aphorism: "A man — if he's any good — makes eight axes a day. If he's no good he can make 10 or 12." Proulx pays admirable attention to the dichotomy between 19th-century wasteful American timbering and conservation-oriented German forestry practices, and to the possible symbiosis between Amerindian medicine plants and the healthy trees that surrounded them in pre-logging days. She vivifies these topics through such concisely effective landscape descriptions as this one from 18th-century Maine: "Sometimes he was on dim Indian trails following landmarks almost always obscured by the jagged skyline of conifers, but more often making his way through logging slash and blowdowns." And while getting all this across, "Barkskins" also manages to follow two French immigrants and their posterity over more than three centuries as they take down the forests of maritime Canada, Maine, New Zealand and Michigan.
On his arrival in Canada in 1693, Charles Duquet (a murdering, thieving, indentured boor) stares at the green gloom around him and is informed: "It is the forest of the world. It is infinite." He runs away and goes into business. Around 1700 we find him in China, asking a local ­trader: "How far back can a forest withdraw before it replenishes itself?" The equivocal answer: "People must eat or they die. They need fuel to cook rice. They must keep warm. So trees fall." Returning to his original Canadian landing, he finds that "the landscape had been corrupted. . . . For a moment he was frightened; if miles of forest could be removed so quickly by a few men with axes, was the forest then as vulnerable as beaver? No. . . . These forests could not disappear. In New France they were vast and eternal." And as Kurt Vonnegut would have said, so it goes, right up to 20th-century Brazil, about which a Duquet descendant assures himself: "The rain forest is so large and rich it defeats all who try to conquer it."
Schmoozing, risking and trading, Duquet becomes what we might now call a multinational. In an Amsterdam coffee­house he meets an Englishman who "had intimate business dealings with the ­newly appointed New England royal mast contractor." So Duquet learns the art of "procuring ownership of great white pine tracts by purchasing old township grants." He trades secretly with Scotland, Anglicizes his name to Duke, and by the time he meets his fate, the firm of Duke & Sons has become a perpetual motion machine, hacking and selling.
Accompanying Duquet at the novel's opening is another servant named René Sel, who does not run away. In order to wed a wealthy Frenchwoman, the master discards his Micmac concubine, whom he marries to Sel. From their union springs the novel's other narrative thread. The mostly Euro-American Dukes sell lumber on an ever vaster scale, while the métis Sels struggle between subsistence in a blighted indigenous culture and badly compensated piecework in lumber extraction. "They all knew that river work was the most dangerous. . . . That was why the boss gave the water work to the Indians."
The chronicled generations come and go, fattening on dead trees, enacting and re-enacting the tragedy of the commons, whose addictive me-first arithmetic prevents most but not all of them from considering that someday the bottom must fall out for everybody.
Annie Proulx is on the side of the angels. We need more writers like her to hammer home the message that we had better stop mistreating one another and our planet. Unfortunately, hammering is just what she does, as when she annotates a senator's remark that "the Constitution was made by whites for whites." ("After all," she inserts, "who else was there?" Ha, ha.) The whole novel suffers such two-­dimensionality, as in one episode from the 1750s, when a Duke descendant complains about thievish competitors who logged his acres, then knocks out his pipe, which starts a fire. "In Boston the next day Bernard saw the distant smoke and reckoned it was in Duke & Sons' forestland; but fire could not be helped. Forests burned, according to God's will." That this supposedly canny fellow could be so careless of his own profit is preposterous, but Proulx loses sight of this in her zeal to remind us who the wastrels are.
Worse yet are her stylistic infelicities. Sometimes her Native American characters speak a cigar-store pidgin to one another, only to drop it further down on the same page. Thus Achille Sel, explaining to his kinsmen, presumably in Micmac: "We got not much food now. We hunt today, go a little east." Three paragraphs later his speech patterns have changed: "And I see trees encumbered with knots of the fire-starting tinder." The effect is as ludicrous as Van Helsing's on-again, off-again Dutchisms in "Dracula."
But although "Barkskins" comes out poorly when considered line by line, many characters linger in the mind: the Scandinavian wife who at her death is revealed to have been a man; the ardent wife whose father "taught her Everything she knows and she turned out Good"; the delightfully brave and businesslike Lavinia Duke, who "could not resist her nature" and so wrecks forest ecosystems without pity.
Proulx is particularly effective in conveying the effect of one generation on the next. Consider the repercussions when Achille Sel, who still follows Micmac lifeways, returns from a sojourn into the uncut northern forests and finds his wigwam burned, his wife murdered by English soldiers. Leaving his son and nephew behind "until he sent word for them to come," he goes to seek out a "safe place" and, since there is none, drifts from one underpaid timbering job to the next, never coming home. In time Achille's damaged son, Kuntaw, abandons his own wife and child, starting a new life with a beautiful métis woman. "She needed him to make her an Indian," but soon she loses interest. Kuntaw's son Tonny tracks him down, but never can learn to love him and dies young. As for the remaining children, they find Kuntaw's Micmac teachings "only a kind of play. . . . That world he wanted them to know had vanished."
Now our own world is likewise fading, thanks to climate change. The root cause of our self-impoverishment is thoughtfully teased out in "Barkskins," whose best line may well be this: "My life has ever been dedicated to the removal of the forest for the good of men."
fully teased out in “Barkskins,” whose best line may well be this: “My life has ever been dedicated to the removal of the forest for the good of men.”.
