In the post-"Gone Girl" thriller era, you've got to move your domestic malice along with zip, vigor and a sharp eye for The Way We Live Now. So it serves Joseph Finder well that his new suspense novel ­includes tartly informed themes about adult children caring for elderly parents, and the state of print journalism. His protagonist, Rick Hoffman, has abandoned his career as an investigative reporter at a newspaper and now writes puff pieces for a Boston-based city magazine, one of those glossies that stay fat with ads supplementing their fawning-over-the-wealthy ­editorial content.
But at the start of "The Fixer," Rick is laid off from that job — poor guy, he can't even sell out successfully. He decides to move into his father's old house, and while doing some renovation discovers over $3 million in cash in the building's crawl space. His father, left speechless after a stroke and consigned to a nursing home, is unable to tell Rick where the money came from, and Rick, who needs the dough, spends some but hides the rest while searching for the truth of its origin. And then unsavory people come looking for Rick and the money.
It's a nifty little setup, and Finder makes the most of it. For much of his ­career, ­Fin­der specialized in suspense novels set in the world of high finance; he also developed a series character, Nick ­Hel­ler — Finder's so-called private spy. But starting with the crisp "Suspicion" in 2014, Finder moved into different territory: the "ordinary suburban guy in jeopardy" thriller. It's an area that's been worked over best in recent years by writers like Harlan Coben, Linwood Barclay and the underrated Australian author Michael ­Robotham.
Finder has quickly found his own niche in this field. His middle-class men of quiet desperation are hemmed in by a bad economy and family responsibilities that prevent them from sustaining idealistic career goals. Rick despises himself every time a magazine editor asks him to give a subject "the full Rick Hoffman treatment," which means squandering his writing talent to compose overripe praise for a wealthy interviewee.
He's relieved, therefore, when he can oil up his rusty reportorial skills to investigate his father's past, to find the source of his crawl-space windfall. Turns out Dad was once a firebrand attorney whose ­clients included members of the Black Panthers and the Weather Underground, but who also funded his crusade with laundered money from illegal sources. Rick's father was, in short, the "fixer" of the novel's title, a go-between who was rewarded with the wads of cash Rick found in his father's house.
Finder does a good job of keeping us as surprised as Rick is as he discovers each new detail of the past, and takes care to place our hero in danger for knowing too much. He is briefly abducted by a mostly unseen attacker — the only identifying glimpse Rick gets is of the man's cloverleaf tattoo: "On each leaf was the number 6, making it 666. The number of the Antichrist." I was relieved that this multilayered approach to symbolism didn't reveal a satanic leprechaun as the villain. The author is, thankfully, more of a hard-boiled realist.
If you're just discovering Finder's work, I'd recommend you start with the more twisty "Suspicion." But if you're in the mood for tense, witty angst about closed-down career opportunities and dirty ­money cleansed by family redemption, "The Fixer" is the way to go.
­money cleansed by family redemption, “The Fixer” is the way to go.
