Alfred Hitchcock may have said all there is to say about the fallibility of making assumptions about what you see through a window, but, like most important lessons, this one can bear some repeating. To the limited scope of a window frame, the former London journalist Paula Hawkins, in her debut thriller, “The Girl on the Train,” offers a few additional obfuscations. First, her novel’s protagonist, Rachel, looks out through the window of a moving train on her daily commute. Second, Rachel is your basic hot mess: depressed, unemployed, still in mourning for the death of her marriage and prone to alcoholic blackouts that coincide with critical moments in the tale of a missing woman later found dead. Rachel might as well be wearing a sign that reads “Unreliable Narrator.”
Even though she’s been fired for drunkenness, Rachel continues to take her usual train from Ashbury, a featureless “new town” at the outer edge of exurban London, to Euston Station and back each day, for the commute has become her anchor. Or not, perhaps, the commute itself but the brief, rolling view of one particular street along the line, where Rachel once lived with her husband, Tom, and where Tom now lives with his second wife, Anna, and their child. It’s painful to look into the windows of her former home, so Rachel compensates by embroidering the lives of a couple she doesn’t know, who live a few houses away. Confident in her daily observations, Rachel idealizes the pair, naming them Jason and Jess, and conjuring colorful jobs for them (globe-trotting relief doctor for him, a job in the fashion industry for her) along with a devoted, passionate relationship. 
Given the distortion of her blackouts and the vague, terrifying impressions that suffuse them (violence, shame, a filthy underpass where someone gets badly hurt), it’s not a great leap to wonder whether Rachel herself is somehow responsible when the idealized Jess (her real name, it turns out, is Megan) goes missing. Far from the imaginary woman Rachel has admired through her train window, Megan is a lost soul, weighed down by guilt and prone to bad behavior of her own. She has a tense relationship with Jason (real name Scott, and not a heroic Doctors Without Borders physician but an I.T. specialist), and he, therefore, becomes the focus of police attention, soon to be supplanted by Rachel herself.
This is because Rachel, who continues to stalk her former husband — phoning and dropping off notes, even entering his home while intoxicated and wandering away with the baby (her own infertility never far from her addled thoughts) — now unaccountably inserts herself into the police investigation, taking incomprehensible risks for her own safety and straining the credulity of the reader. Soon she’s offering suggestions to the police based on what she thinks she has seen from the train, sleeping with the prime suspect and even making appointments with Megan’s therapist. (All this in spite of the fact that the actual murderer’s identity is apparent to any reader with a passing familiarity with homo sociopathicus.) 
It’s difficult to imagine any way these events could be rendered credible, but “The Girl on the Train” is further impaired by its narrative structure, which shifts from Rachel’s discounted chronological impressions to the missing Megan’s unhappy story and back to an account of Anna’s growing frustration with her husband’s unstable ex-wife. The fact that Rachel’s first-person voice is so maddening — alternately imprecise and overtly declarative — doesn’t mitigate the reader’s frustration: “It’s different, the nightmare I wake from this morning. In it, I’ve done something wrong, but I don’t know what it is, all I know is that it cannot be put right. All I know is that Tom hates me now, he won’t talk to me any longer, and he has told everyone I know about the terrible thing I’ve done, and everyone has turned against me: old colleagues, my friends, even my mother. They look at me with disgust, contempt, and no one will listen to me, no one will let me tell them how sorry I am. I feel awful, desperately guilty, I just can’t think what it is that I’ve done.” 
Readers sometimes conflate the “likability” of characters with a compulsion to care about their fate, but with a protagonist so determined to behave illogically, self-destructively and frankly narcissistically (someone even refers to her as “Nancy Drew”), it’s tough to root for Rachel. She’s like the clueless heroine of a slasher film who opts to enter the decrepit, boarded-up house where all her friends have been murdered because she hears a mysterious sound through an upstairs window. That window, like the rear window on a communal courtyard or the window of a passing train, offers only incomplete information about the horrors on the other side: enough to raise an alarm, but not enough for the narrator to throw reason and basic self-preservation to the winds and climb through. Jimmy Stewart could have told us that. 
