Miracles thicker than fog on flight of No 10607.
It was the day after Christmas. As I was wheeled backward through the glaring hospital corridor, rows of overhead lights looming up behind me like little suns and then fading away to the front, I remember thinking that this day was just 45 years since the day of the five miracles. The miracles that had come just after Christmas so long ago. The anesthetist had warned me that the operating room would feel cold. He came to introduce himself to me in the little cubicle where I lay on the gurney. My wife, Kathleen, held my hand and tried to look calm. But even the corridor already felt cold in my hospital gown. Everything was in slow motion. The distance to the operating room was probably only 100 feet, but the trip seemed to take half an hour. I had plenty of time to think. I remembered the lucky accident that brought me to this rolling gurney so early on a Tuesday morning - the magnetic resonator imaging test that looked for a cause of hearing loss in my left ear, but found instead, a tumor nestled against the left side of my brain. I looked it up in our family medical book, reading about paralysis, blindness, seizures, or worse.
I remembered the clear, calm voice of Dr John Wright explaining how he was going to cut a hole in my skull and take it out; I remembered, too, his calm recital of possible after-effects.
I recalled Kathleen's marvelous calm as Christmas approached, as I frantically graded papers for 150 students at the university and tried to think of everything that needed doing before the operation. I knew, though, that she was seething with worry. She did not even blanch when I arranged to have her signature added to the checking account for a small publishing business I ran outside of university time. Just in case.
I remembered Christmas Day, with daughter Sheila and son Brian and his wife, Debbie, trying to act as if it were a normal day. I felt the gurney shoulder its way through the swinging doors behind me. The glare of the operating room surprised me. So did the noise: chatter, clatter, rattle. I saw Dr Wright over to the right looking at four bright pictures suspended on the wall. I had seen them before: my own skull, with the bright, pear-shaped tumor standing out against the darker background of brain and bone. A clock on the wall said 10 minutes to 8 o'clock.
